---
title: 'Call for Chapters: Training Student Library Instructors'
date: 2022-04-01
permalink: /posts/call-for-chapters
tags:
  - Call for Chapters
  - Training Student Library Instructors
---

About the Books
======
Librarians are increasingly expected to provide instruction as part of their job responsibilities. Repeated reviews of librarian job ads have shown increases in instructional responsibilities or an expectation of instruction as a core responsibility for librarians (Lynch & Smith, 2001; Sproles & Ratledge, 2004; Sproles & Detmering, 2012;  In Dodd's (2013) survey of supervisors, 87% reported that library instruction was very important in their libraries. Additionally, they noted that assisting other instructors, on-the-job training, in-house training programs, and observing other instructors were the best ways to prepare a new librarian to do instruction. However, often library school students and early career librarians receive little or no formal teacher training in their graduate programs, from work experiences during grad school, or in their professional roles. 

These two forthcoming volumes will outline case studies and best practices for developing and delivering teacher training for students and early-career librarians in academic libraries and LIS graduate programs. 

These two volumes intend to situate the impetus for training student instructors. They will
- provide case studies and examples with detailed resources regarding the development,
delivery, and assessment of library instruction training in academic libraries and
graduate programs, 
- present effective and successful partnerships that leverage student instructors, and
- contribute critical reflections from student workers and early career librarians to
provide important context for designing student-centered initiatives.

Each volume will be separated into three general sections:
- Theory, Practice, and Need
- Case Studies
- Learner Reflections & Perspectives

Training Student Library Instructors, Vol 1: A Guide for LIS Faculty &amp; Graduate Programs
------
The first volume will focus on integrating teacher training in graduate programs by LIS faculty. The book will begin with background and a review of relevant literature regarding training in LIS curricula, followed by case studies with practical examples of effective training in LIS programs and case studies of LIS faculty collaborating with partners on or off campus to provide training for students. The volume will close with reflections and perspectives from graduate students and early-career librarians with or without instruction training in their LIS programs. 

Training Student Library Instructors, Vol 2: A Guide for Librarians &amp; Academic Libraries
------
The second volume will focus on training student library instructors in academic libraries through training programs, on-the-job training, or other mechanisms. The book will begin with a framing of the need for training library student workers to teach and the value of peer-to-peer teaching & learning initiatives. This will be followed by case studies of how librarians and academic libraries have incorporated instruction training for their student workers or early-career librarians to prepare them for instructional duties and case studies exploring collaborations for peer-to-peer teaching opportunities. The volume will close with reflections and perspectives from graduate students and early-career librarians about their experiences with on-the-job training or in-house training programs in academic libraries as student workers or early-career librarians.

Call for Chapter Proposals
======

Submission Procedures
======

About the Editor
======
Matthew Weirick Johnson (they/them) is Librarian for English, History &amp; Comparative Literature
and Lead for Teaching &amp; Learning at UCLA Library. As Lead for Teaching &amp; Learning, Johnson led
the development and delivery of UCLA Library’s inaugural library instruction training for library
student research assistants and continues to lead this initiative to annually train student
workers to provide library instruction. They implemented the Library’s student instruction
training program and continue to coordinate it.  

They have published on topics related to library instruction and information literacy in
*Progressive Librarian*, *Library Trends*, *College &amp; Research Libraries News*, and *The Journal of
Interactive Technology &amp; Pedagogy*. Johnson has chapters accepted in forthcoming ACRL Press
publications including *Academic Librarian Burnout: Causes and Responses*; *Teaching Critical
Reading Skills: Strategies for Academic Librarians*; *Undergraduate Research and the Academic
Librarian: Case Studies &amp; Best Practices, Volume 2*; *Instructional Identities and Information
Literacy: Transforming Our Programs, Institutions, and Profession, Volume 2*; and *Everyday
Evidence-Based Practice in the Academic Library: Case Studies and Reflections*.
